my first year of grad school I found
myself in my bedroom eating lots of Ben
and Jerry's watching some trashy TV and
maybe maybe listening to Taylor Swift I
had just gone through a breakup so for
the longest time all I would do is
recall the memory of this person over
and over again wishing that I could get
rid of that gut-wrenching visceral bla
feeling now as it turns out I'm a
neuroscientist so I knew that the memory
of that person and the awful emotional
undertones that color in that memory are
largely mediated by separate brain
systems and so I thought what if we
could go into the brain and edit out
that nauseating feeling but while
keeping the memory of that person intact
and then I realized maybe that's a
little bit lofty for now so what if we
could start off by going into the brain
and just finding a single memory to
begin with could we jumpstart that
memory back to life maybe even play with
the contents of that memory all that
said there is one person in the entire
world right now that I really hope is
not watching this talk
so there is a catch there is a catch
these ideas probably remind you of Total
Recall Eternal Sunshine of the spotless
mind or of Inception but the movie stars
that we work with are the celebrities of
the lab test mice as neuroscientists we
work in the lab with mice trying to
understand how memory works and today we
hope to convince you that now we are
actually able to activate a memory in
the brain at the speed of light to do
this there's only two simple steps to
follow first you find a label a memory
in the brain and then you activate it
with a switch as simple as that are you
convinced so turns out finding a memory
in the brain isn't all that easy indeed
this is way more difficult than let's
say finding a needle in a haystack
because at least you know the needle is
still something you can physically put
your fingers on but memory is not and
also there's way more cells in your
brain that the number of straws yeah you
know hey typical haystack
so yeah this task does seem to be
daunting but luckily we got help from
the brain itself it turned out all we
need to do is basic to let the brain
form a memory and then the brain will
tell us which cells are involved in that
particular memory so what was going on
in my brain while I was recalling the
memory of an X if you were to just
completely ignore human ethics for a
second and slice up my brain right now
you would see that there was an amazing
number of brain regions that were active
while recalling that memory now one
brain region that would be robustly
active in particular is called the
hippocampus which for decades has been
implicated in processing the kinds of
memories that we hold near and dear
which also makes it an ideal target to
go into and to try to find and maybe
reactivate a memory where is doing into
the hippocampus of course you will see
lots of cells but we are able to find
which cells are involved in a particular
memory because whenever a cell is active
like wines forming a memory it will also
leave a photo print that were later
allow us to know
these cells are recently active so the
same way that building lights at night
let you know that somebody is probably
working there at any given moment in a
very real sense there are biological
sensors within a cell that are turned on
only when that cell was just working
there's sort of biological windows that
light up to let us know that that cell
was just active so we clipped part of
this sensor and attach that to a switch
to control the cells and we pack this
switch into an engineered virus and
inject that into the brain of the mice
so whenever a memory isn't being formed
any active cells for the memory will
also have this switch installed so
here's what the hippocampus looks like
after forming a fear memory for example
the sea of blue that you see here are
densely packed brain cells but the green
brain cells the green brain cells are
the ones that are holding onto a
specific fear memory so you're looking
at the crystallization of the fleeting
formation of fear you're actually
looking at the cross-section of a memory
right now now for the switch we've been
talking about ideally the switch has to
act really fast it shouldn't take
minutes or hours to work it should act
at the speed of the brain in
milliseconds so what do you think's you
could we use let's say pharmacological
drugs to activate or inactivate brain
cells yes drugs are pretty messy they
spread everywhere and also it takes
forever to act on cells so it will not
allow us to control a memory in real
time so Steve how well let's zap to
bring with electricity so electricity is
pretty fast but we probably wouldn't be
able to target it to just the specific
cells that hold on to a memory and we
probably fry the brain oh that's true so
it looks like we're indeed we need to
find a better way to impact the brain at
the speed of light so it just so happens
that light travels at the speed of light
so maybe we could activate or inactivate
memories by just using light that's
pretty fast and because normally brain
cells don't respond to pulses of light
so those that would respond to pulses of
light are those that contain a
light-sensitive switch now to do that
first we need to trick brain cells to
respond to laser beam
yep you were there right we are trying
to shoot lasers into the brain and the
technique that lets us do that is after
genetics after genetics gave us this
light switch that we can use to turn
brain cells on or off and the name of
that switch is channelrhodopsin seen
here as these green dots attached to
this brain cell you can think of
channelrhodopsin as a sort of
light-sensitive switch that can be
artificially installed in brain cells so
that now we can use that switch to
activator and activate the brain cells
simply by clicking it and in this case
we click it on with passes of light so
we attach this light-sensitive switch of
channelrhodopsin to the sensor we've
been talking about and inject this into
the brain so whenever a memory isn't
being formed and the active cell for
that particular memory will also have
this light-sensitive switch installed so
that we can control these cells by the
flipping of laser just like this one you
see so let's put all of this to the test
now what we can do is we can take our
mice and then we can put them in a box
that looks exactly like this box here
and then we can give them a very mild
foot shock so that they form a fear
memory of this box they learned that
something bad happened here now with our
system the cells that are active in the
hippocampus in the making of this memory
only those cells will now contain
channelrhodopsin when you are as small
as a mouse it feels as if the whole
world is trying to get you so the best
the response of defense is trying to be
undetected whenever a mouse is in fear
it will show this very typical behavior
by staying at one corner of the box
trying to not move any part of his body
and this posture is called freezing so
if I must remember that something bad
happened in this box and we when we put
them back into the same box it will
basically show freezing because it
doesn't want to be detected by any
potential threats in this box so you can
think of freezing as you're walking down
the street minding your own business and
then out of nowhere you almost run into
an ex-girlfriend or ex-boyfriend and now
those terrifying two seconds where you
start thinking what do I do do I say hi
do I shake their hand do I turn around
run away do I sit here but Tonica don't
exist those kind of fleeting thoughts
that physically incapacitated
you to temporarily give you that deer in
headlights look however if I put the
mouse in a completely different new box
like that the next one it will not be
afraid of this box because there's no
reason that it will be afraid of this
new environment but what if we put the
mouse in this new box but at the same
time we activate the fear memory using
laser just like we did before are we
going to bring back the fear memory for
the first box into this completely new
environment all right and here's the
million dollar experiment now to bring
back to life the memory of that day I
remember that the Red Sox had just won
it was a green spring day perfect for
going up and down the river and then
maybe going to the north end to get some
cannoli these hashtags are saying now
shoo and I on the other hand we're in a
completely windowless black room not
making any ocular movement that even
remotely resembles an eye blink because
our eyes were fixed onto a computer
screen we were looking at this mouse
here trying to activate a memory for the
first time using our technique and that
this is what we saw when we first put
the mouse into this box
it's exploring sniffing around walking
around minding its own business because
actually by nature mice are pretty
curious animals they want to know what's
going on in this new box it's
interesting but the moment we will turn
on laser like you see now all of a
sudden the must enter this freezing mode
it stayed at here and try not to move
any part of its body clearly it's
freezing so indeed looks like we're able
to bring back the fear memory for the
first box in this completely new
environment while watching this Steve
and I are as shocked as mouse itself
so after the experiment the two of us
just left the room without saying
anything after kind of long awkward
period of time Steve broke the silence
did that just work yes I said indeed it
worked
we're really excited about this and then
we published our findings in the Journal
of nature ever since the publication of
our work we've been receiving numerous
comments from all over the Internet
maybe we can take a look at some of
those so the first thing that you'll
notice is that people have really strong
opinions about this kind of work now I
happen to completely agree with the
optimism of this first quote because on
a scale of 0 to Morgan Freeman's voice
it happens to be one of the most
evocative accolades that I've heard come
our way but as you'll see it's not the
only opinion that's out there indeed if
I take a look at the second one I think
we can agree that it's probably not as
positive but this also reminds us that
although we are still working with mice
it's probably a good idea to start
thinking and discussing about the
possible ethical ramifications of memory
control now in the spirit of the third
quote we want to tell you about a recent
project that we've been working on in
lab that we've called project inception
so we reasoned that now that we can
reactivate a memory what if we do so but
then begin to tinker with that memory
could we possibly even turn it into a
false memory so our memory is
sophisticated and a dynamic but if just
for simplicity let's imagine memory as a
movie clip so far what we told you is
basically we can control this play
button of the clip so that we can play
this video clip anytime anywhere but is
there a possibility that we can actually
get inside the brain and edit this movie
clip so that we can make it different
from the original yes we can turn out
that all we need to do is basically
reactivate a memory using laser just
like we did before but at the same time
if we present new information and
this new information to incorporate into
this old memory this will change the
memory it's not like making our remix
tape so how do we do this rather than
finding a fear memory in the brain we
can start by taking our animals and
let's say we put them in a blue box like
this blue box here and we find the brain
cells that represent that blue box and
we tricked them to respond to pulses of
light exactly like we had said before
now the next day we can take our animals
and place them in a red box that they've
never experienced before we can shoot
light into the brain to reactivate the
memory of the blue box so what would
happen here if while the animals
recalling the memory of the blue box we
gave it a couple of mild foot shocks so
here we're trying to artificially make
an association between the memory of the
blue box and the foot shocks themselves
we're just trying to connect the two so
the test if we have done so we can take
our animals once again and place them
back in the blue box again we had just
reactivated the memory of the blue box
while the animal got a couple of mild
foot shocks and now the animal suddenly
freezes it said snow it's recalling
being mildly shocked in this environment
even though that never actually happened
so it formed a false memory because it's
falsely fearing an environment where
technically speaking
nothing bad actually happened to it so
so far we're only talking about this
light control on switch in fact we also
have a light control the off switch and
it's very easy to imagine that by
installing this light control off switch
we can also turn off a memory anytime
anywhere so everything we've been
talking today is based on this
philosophically charged principle of
neuron science that the mind with these
or seemingly mysterious properties is
actually made of physical stuff that we
can tinker with and for me personally I
see a world where we can reactivate any
kind of memory that we'd like I also see
a world where we can erase unwanted
memories now I even see a world where
editing memories is something of a
reality because we're living in a time
where it's possible to put questions
from the tree of science fiction and to
ground them in experimental reality
nowadays people in the lab and the
people in other groups Oh
for the world are using similar methods
to activate or edit memories whether
that's old or new positive or negative
all sorts of memories so that we can
understand how memory works for example
one group in our lab was able to find
the brain cells that make up a fear
memory and converted them into a
pleasurable memory just like that
that's exactly what I mean about editing
these kinds of processes
now one dude and lab was even able to
reactivate memories of female mice in
male mice which rumor has it is a
pleasurable experience indeed we are
living in a very exciting moment where
science doesn't have any arbitrary speed
limits but is only bound by our own
imagination and finally what do we make
of all this how do we push this
technology forward these are the
questions that should not remain just
inside the lab and so one goal of
today's talk was to bring everybody up
to speed with the kind of stuff that's
possible in modern neuroscience but now
just as importantly to actively engage
everybody in this conversation so let's
think together as a team about what this
all means and where we can and should go
from here because you and I think we all
have some really big decisions ahead of
us thank you
[Applause]